[Version 9.0] Feature support for record classes (#1458)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/classes.md

> ```ANTLR

Reviewer: **Heads up grammarians!** As you will see below, I have a generous syntax for a class in which not all combinations are permitted, and those combinations are described in text as constraints. (For example, a record class can have a *delimited_parameter_list* while a non-record class cannot. And for a record class, *class_modifier* shall not be `static`.) Yes, we could try to break this up into separate rules for record classes and non-record classes to eliminate some (but maybe not all) of those constraints. However, there will be tweaks to this grammar in future versions; specifically:

* V10 allows `record class` as well as `record`.
* V10 supports `record struct`.
* V12 allows a primary constructor (which uses *delimited_parameter_list*) on non-record classes and structs.

which means that extra work done now to make the grammar rules more complete likely will be (at least partially) undone in future revs.

Reviewer: I recently finished the spec for V10’s record structs (see Draft PR #[1556](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/1556)), in which I was able to quite easily split the top-level grammar into non-record struct and record struct rules *without* the need for textual constraints. Since then, I have completed a review of this V9 spec for record classes and I believe the same approach I used for structs can be used here. However, rather than making those changes to this PR, after discussing this privately with Nigel, I'm proposing them in this comment.
 
Here’s what I have for the revised grammar (which mirrors what I have done for V10’s record structs):
 
```ANTLR
class_declaration
    : non_record_class_declaration
    | record_class_declaration
    ;
 
non_record_class_declaration
    : attributes? class_modifier* 'partial'? 'class' identifier
        type_parameter_list? class_base? type_parameter_constraints_clause*
        class_body ';'?
    ;
 
record_class_declaration
    : attributes? class_modifier* 'partial'? 'record' identifier 
      type_parameter_list? delimited_parameter_list? class_base? 
      type_parameter_constraints_clause* record_class_body
    ;
 
class_body
    : '{' class_member_declaration* '}'
    ;
 
record_class_body
    : class_body ';'?
    | ';'
    ;
```

Reviewer: I have changed the grammar along the lines I proposed earlier in this comment thread, so there are now separate rules for record and non-record class.

class_declaration
    : attributes? class_modifier* 'partial'? class_tag identifier

>         type_parameter_list? parameter_list? class_base?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        type_parameter_list? delimited_parameter_list? class_base?
```

        type_parameter_constraints_clause* class_body
    ;

class_tag
    : 'class'

>     | 'record'

Reviewer: FYI: In V9, `record` means `record class` but we can't say that explicitly. In V10, this is permitted and we'll replace these 2  rules with `'record'? 'class'`.

Reviewer: This change has been reversed.

    ;
```

> A *class_declaration* consists of an optional set of *attributes* ([§23](attributes.md#23-attributes)), followed by an optional set of *class_modifier*s ([§15.2.2](classes.md#1522-class-modifiers)), followed by an optional `partial` modifier ([§15.2.7](classes.md#1527-partial-type-declarations)), followed by a *class_tag* and an *identifier* that names the class, followed by an optional *type_parameter_list* ([§15.2.3](classes.md#1523-type-parameters)), followed by an optional *parameter_list* ([§15.6.2.1]( classes.md#15621-general)), followed by an optional *class_base* specification ([§15.2.4](classes.md#1524-class-base-specification)), followed by an optional set of *type_parameter_constraints_clause*s ([§15.2.5](classes.md#1525-type-parameter-constraints)), followed by a *class_body* ([§15.2.6](classes.md#1526-class-body)), optionally followed by a semicolon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A *class_declaration* consists of an optional set of *attributes* ([§23](attributes.md#23-attributes)), followed by an optional set of *class_modifier*s ([§15.2.2](classes.md#1522-class-modifiers)), followed by an optional `partial` modifier ([§15.2.7](classes.md#1527-partial-type-declarations)), followed by a *class_tag* and an *identifier* that names the class, followed by an optional *type_parameter_list* ([§15.2.3](classes.md#1523-type-parameters)), followed by an optional *delimited_parameter_list* ([§15.6.2.1]( classes.md#15621-general)), followed by an optional *class_base* specification ([§15.2.4](classes.md#1524-class-base-specification)), followed by an optional set of *type_parameter_constraints_clause*s ([§15.2.5](classes.md#1525-type-parameter-constraints)), followed by a *class_body* ([§15.2.6](classes.md#1526-class-body)), optionally followed by a semicolon.
```

A class declaration shall not supply *type_parameter_constraints_clause*s unless it also supplies a *type_parameter_list*.

A class declaration that supplies a *type_parameter_list* is a generic class declaration. Additionally, any class nested inside a generic class declaration or a generic struct declaration is itself a generic class declaration, since type arguments for the containing type shall be supplied to create a constructed type ([§8.4](types.md#84-constructed-types)).

If *class_tag* contains `record`, that class is a ***record class***; otherwise, it is a ***non-record class***.

For a record class, *class_modifier* shall not be `static`.

*parameter_list* shall not be present in a non-record class.

A *class_declaration* having a *parameter_list* declares a ***positional record class***.

At most only one partial type declaration of a partial record class may provide a *parameter_list*.

> Parameters in *parameter_list* shall not have `ref`, `out` or `this` modifiers; however, `in` and `params` modifiers are permitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*delimited_parameter_list* shall not be present in a non-record class.

A *class_declaration* having a *delimited_parameter_list* declares a ***positional record class***.

At most only one partial type declaration of a partial record class may provide a *delimited_parameter_list*.

Parameters in *delimited_parameter_list* shall not have `ref`, `out` or `this` modifiers; however, `in` and `params` modifiers are permitted.
```

```ANTLR
class_base
    : ':' class_type base_argument_list?
    | ':' interface_type_list
    | ':' class_type base_argument_list? ',' interface_type_list
    ;

base_argument_list
    : '(' argument_list? ')'
    ;

interface_type_list
    : interface_type (',' interface_type)*
    ;
```

A record class may not inherit from a non-record class other than `object`, and a non-record class may not inherit from a record class.

> It is an error for *class_base* to have a *base_argument_list* if the corresponding *class_declaration* does not contain a *parameter_list*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is an error for *class_base* to have a *base_argument_list* if the corresponding *class_declaration* does not contain a *delimited_parameter_list*.
```

```ANTLR
class_body
    : '{' class_member_declaration* '}' ';'?
    | ';'
    ;
```

> For a record class, the *class_body*s `{}`, `{};`, and `;` are equivalent. They all indicate that the only members are those synthesized by the compiler (§synth-members).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A non-record class shall not have a *class_body* of `;`.

For a record class, the *class_body*s `{}`, `{};`, and `;` are equivalent. They all indicate that the only members are those synthesized by the compiler (§synth-members).
```

### 15.2.7 Partial type declarations

> The modifier `partial` is used when defining a class, struct, or interface type in multiple parts. The `partial` modifier is a contextual keyword ([§6.4.4](lexical-structure.md#644-keywords)) and has special meaning immediately before the keywords `class`, `struct`, and `interface`. (A partial type may contain partial method declarations ([§15.6.9](classes.md#1569-partial-methods)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The modifier `partial` is used when defining a class, struct, or interface type in multiple parts. The `partial` modifier is a contextual keyword ([§6.4.4](lexical-structure.md#644-keywords)) and has special meaning in a *class_declaration*, a *struct_declaration*, or an *interface_declaration*. (A partial type may contain partial method declarations ([§15.6.9](classes.md#1569-partial-methods)).
```

A non-record class shall not have a *class_body* of `;`.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: This is in the wrong section, and had been moved to the class body section.

```ANTLR

> parameter_list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
delimited_parameter_list
```

>     : '(' formal_parameter_list? ')'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    : '(' parameter_list? ')'
```

    ;

> formal_parameter_list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parameter_list
```

The record class type implements `System.IEquatable<R>` and includes a synthesized, strongly-typed overload of `Equals(R? other)` where `R` is the record class type. The method is `public`, and the method is `virtual` unless the record class type is `sealed`. The method can be declared explicitly. It is an error if the explicit declaration does not match the expected signature or accessibility, or the explicit declaration doesn't allow overriding in a derived type and the record class type is not `sealed`.

If `Equals(R? other)` is user-defined (that is, not synthesized) but `GetHashCode` is not, a warning shall be issued.

```csharp
public virtual bool Equals(R? other);
```

The synthesized `Equals(R?)` returns `true` if and only if each of the following are `true`:

- `other` is not `null`, and
- For each instance field `fieldN` in the record class type that is not inherited, the value of `System.Collections.Generic.EqualityComparer<TN>.Default.Equals(fieldN, other.fieldN)` where `TN` is the field type, and
- If there is a base record class type, the value of `base.Equals(other)` (a non-virtual call to `public virtual bool Equals(Base? other)`); otherwise

> the value of `EqualityContract == other.EqualityContract`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If there is a base record class type, the value of `base.Equals(other)` (a non-virtual call to `public virtual bool Equals(Base? other)`); otherwise the value of `EqualityContract == other.EqualityContract`.
```

The record class type includes a synthesized override equivalent to a method declared as follows:

```csharp
public override int GetHashCode();
```

The method may be declared explicitly. It is an error if the explicit declaration doesn't allow overriding it in a derived type and the record class type is not `sealed`. It is an error if either the synthesized, or the explicitly declared, method doesn't override `object.GetHashCode()` (for example, due to shadowing in intermediate base types).

A warning shall be issued if one of `Equals(R?)` and `GetHashCode()` is explicitly declared, but the other is not.

The synthesized override of `GetHashCode()` returns an `int` result of combining the following values:

- For each instance field `fieldN` in the record class type that is not inherited, the value of `System.Collections.Generic.EqualityComparer<TN>.Default.GetHashCode(fieldN)` where `TN` is the field type, and
- If there is a base record class type, the value of `base.GetHashCode()`; otherwise

> the value of `System.Collections.Generic.EqualityComparer<System.Type>.Default.GetHashCode(EqualityContract)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If there is a base record class type, the value of `base.GetHashCode()`; otherwise the value of `System.Collections.Generic.EqualityComparer<System.Type>.Default.GetHashCode(EqualityContract)`.
```

### §rec-class-prtmem Printing members

If a record class is derived directly from `object`, the class includes a synthesized method equivalent to a method declared as follows:

```csharp
bool PrintMembers(System.Text.StringBuilder builder);
```

The method is `private` if the record class type is sealed. Otherwise, the method is virtual and protected.

The ***printable members of a class*** are the instance public field and readable property members.

The method performs the following tasks:

> 1. Calls the method `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.RuntimeHelpers.EnsureSufficientExecutionStack()` if that method is present and the record class has printable members.

Reviewer: Do we really want to expose this type in the spec?
